The tape wasn't running.
We must be half asleep today.
We're starting from scratch.
I'm sorry.
It's good to check everyone.
I saw the red light going and it was bumping, but the tape wasn't moving.
Yeah, it wasn't.
Well, we don't have to cover everything.
I've got a lot of what I told you about myself in there.
I mean, there was a lot of personal stuff that I don't think we have to go over there.
I am very interested in
You said you were in the Peace Corps?
Yes.
In the late 60s.
And the area of Nigeria that became the Afrin seceded for a year after the Civil War began.
I went to Liberia and I was there for a year and a half.
Do you have your biographical background in there?
You said you went to schools again?
University of Redlands.
Graduated from the University of Redlands.
What year was that?
1964.
You're studying at the United Nations.
program at Drew University in Madison, New Jersey.
Western State, I went to UCLA Law School for two years, and then was out for six years, that was when I was in the Peace Corps, and I finished up at Western State University.
And then just tell me, you've been here in Sacramento, I think you said 16 years, you worked for the
I was a lawyer for the legislature for a couple of years.
I've been an administrative law judge for nine years.
I hear and decide cases involving unemployment matters, disability matters, some tax matters within the lawyers.
So you draw a state salary?
Yes, I do.
A fixed salary.
Right.
Which is interesting to me because your means, regardless of what they are, are not a millionaire's risk.
That's right.
And that is interesting, because every book collector can, anyone can collect satisfactorily at whatever level they're true.
Sure, yeah.
And, you know, with me, it's, it's, I sometimes used to very poor judgment in, in, in, I mean, to digress, it's an emotional experience the first time you spend a hundred dollars for a book.
And it's another kind of experience the first time you spend a thousand dollars for a book, and the first time you spend, you know, significantly more than that.
You keep on upping the ante, and I have found myself making decisions to buy when it really wasn't wise financially, and there's been a real struggle.
Hopefully I don't do that anymore, but I've certainly done it in the past.
You did say that the first collectible, per se, that you bought was after you got out of the Peace Corps.
No, it was Death in the Afternoon Without a Jacket.
Right.
And that kind of began.
Yeah, I learned that there were first editions, that people collected them, and this was a big, beautiful book, you know.
And then I started going to bookstores, used bookstores and rare bookstores and talking.
And in over 23 years, people who have gotten to know about me as a real serious Hemingway collector, I get 250 to 300
catalogs a year from book dealers throughout the country.
And the most wonderful find, which you read about in the New York Times, the way that arose, there was a book dealer in Florida who knew me as a serious Hemingway collector.
And he telephoned me one day, said someone had walked into his shop and handed him, and I'll show you exactly what he was handed right now, and handed him a couple of
typed it in pages and it said that it was a Hemingway short story and that his mother had typed for Hemingway in Cuba in the 30s.
Wow.
And the dealer sent it to me and said, is this really Hemingway?
And what is it?
So he was sending it to you for a consultation as much as anything else.
Yes, right.
What he sent me were Xerox copies of these two pages.
Okay.
And that is the first draft
of the story of the capital of the world, Hemingway did it on his typewriter.
And you know it's his because it has the characteristic spacing before as well as after the commas, and he would do that to slow himself down when he typed.
The way he wrote the story, he did four type pages and 38 manuscript pages.
That's the first draft of the story.
The Kennedy Museum in Boston has the second two type pages and the 38 manuscript pages, and these are the first two type pages.
And their story, what they have, begins right here, where this leaves on.
Really?
In addition, there's a complete carbon type script of the story with ink collections in Hemingway's hand on page four.
And he would count the numbering in pencil on each of the pages is in his hand.
He was notorious for counting his output each day.
That's right.
He wanted to do 600 words minimum a day, something like that.
Anyway, this is what the dealer in Florida sent me.
And I sent him back a letter saying, yes, it is.
And this also is a pencil insert in his hand.
Sure.
Okay.
He was a well-built baby.
He was a well-built boy with very black, rather curly hair, good teeth, and a skin that his sisters envied.
And he had a ready and unpuzzled smile.
He was fast on his feet.
and did his work well.
And it goes in right there.
And it says, insert page one.
Yeah.
And he loved his sisters who seemed beautiful and sophisticated.
And then look at that, look at the comma.
And that's Hemingway.
That's no question.
Oh, yeah.
Right.
That's good prose.
That's not bad, is it?
So what did you think when you saw this?
Well, I was just astounded because, you know, Hemingway typescripts or manuscripts are all in museums.
And the story that this guy...
He walks into the store, and he hands this to the book dealer, and he says, this is a Hemingway.
My mom talked for Hemingway, Cuba.
So I wrote the dealer a letter, and I said, is there more?
Yes, it is.
It's the real thing.
I told him what story it was.
Is there more, and is it for sale?
Actually, before I got the letter, I phoned him.
I couldn't wait.
And so then he told me what he knew about it, and he told me a price that he thought that it could be had for, because they talked about a price, because the guy wanted his son.
What was the price?
Well, the price was $10,000.
That's not bad.
No, it wasn't.
But what I did is offer that, and there was no deal.
But you got another dealer involved, unfortunately.
Well, no, I didn't mind the dealer being involved, because I was then a collector, really.
When was this?
Did we say what year this was?
Yeah, this was about three years ago.
Okay, 1987, we'll say.
Yes.
Okay.
Actually, I was a dealer, but he knew me as a collector.
You know, I was just barely beginning in the business.
So a process began then.
The book dealer dealing with the owner of this material and myself in California.
And I kept on asking, is there more?
And it turned out there were six inscribed magazine appearances.
This typescript and some wonderful photographs and a few other...
things, but primarily the six inscribed, oh, a letter, a book by Martha Gelman, or a certain Y, which was inscribed.
Well, we're going to talk about just whatever you're feeling.
Yeah.
For Phyllis Armstrong, who did most of the work with gratitude and affection, Martha Gelman, San Francisco de Paul, that's the Finca in Cuba, where, of course, Martha lived for just four years.
Mary lived
Most of the time there, but... Anyway, the novel... This is A Stricken Field, a novel of today by Martha Gellhorn.
Right.
Okay.
For the sake of the tape, yeah.
Right.
And this is one of the inscribed magazine appearances.
Oh, that's kind of nice.
This is The Spanish War by Ernest Hemingway.
Right.
It's to Jane Armstrong, best always Ernest Hemingway, and that signature is... Right.
Absolutely.
It's like looking at... Right.
Right.
Just to give you a real...
Jane Armstrong married to Richard Armstrong.
Richard Armstrong was head of the International News Service in Havana, Cuba in the 30s.
Jane was his wife.
She worked for the U.S.
Consulate.
Their daughter was Phyllis.
Jane typed Green Hills of Africa, and this is the typescript for Green Hills of Africa.
Phyllis typed, for whom the bell tolls.
Now, I have here...
This is all from the same collection?
Yeah, all of this stuff virtually is from the same collection.
Wow.
But I got it from different places.
See, I got some from the grandson of Jane, the son of Phyllis, and some later I'll get to the story.
How were you beating out everybody else?
How did you have an exclusive... Okay, let me just go on with the story.
Okay, but this is... I'm curious to know why the JFK... It's a wonderful story involved in this.
Right.
How come they weren't?
bidding for this.
Okay.
We're going to finish your story and we'll get to that.
Yeah.
So I kept on asking, is there more?
And finally, he made a list of what he had and sent it to the book dealer.
And so then I made an offer for the whole thing.
To the dealer?
To the dealer.
But I said, it's all or nothing.
I don't want to negotiate individual prices.
There were also a bunch of magazine clippings and news clippings from the 30s and 40s, you know, which were itemized individually, but of course didn't have any value, comparatively speaking.
But in any case, I did make an offer of the whole thing because I didn't want to, you know, have to negotiate.
In any case, he said yes.
And so I flew back to Florida.
And the book dealer and I drove 100 miles to this small Florida seacoast town.
and went into this man's house and purchased this wonderful material.
Let me show you.
Can you tell me who the dealer is, or is that something you'd rather not say?
Oh, I'd just soon not say, but I will, because he's a good friend.
Well, he didn't do anything.
No, no.
It's Michael Slicker of Lighthouse Books in Florida.
He's a good friend.
And he's the best, most prominent book dealer in Florida, so it would be easy to find out.
Well, I could follow him.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
There's really no reason not to.
I mean, there's nothing that's improper, so.
No.
The only thing is, if he gets Hemingway's stuff, I want him to offer it to me.
You know what I mean?
The point is, I'm getting this information with the idea of publishing it, so it's, you know, I mean, you're going to be interested.
Introduced to a reading public here.
This is perhaps one of the other wonderful things from this collection.
Cosmopolitan, the story Nobody Ever Dies, was not republished in book form until the complete stories for Ernest Hemingway in 1987.
What Cosmopolitan is that?
It's March of 1939.
I'll be looking for it.
Yes, yes.
But in the first three or four paragraphs, the portraits are...
the porch or upper porch, from which you can see the Havana Harbor, is mentioned in the text.
And the inscription is, Dear Jane, thanks for the loan of your upper porch for this story, Ernest Hemingway.
This all came from that collection?
yeah this is from the dot see this interesting just to tell me a little bit about who the source is to lighthouse because i don't think you've told me yeah well who this person is and how this all this material happened to be in the possession of the person obviously nobody knew anything about obviously we're going to get through all that yeah um phyllis armstrong was the daughter of jane and jane armstrong the stepdaughter of richard armstrong um and
Richard really was the collector of the family, I understand from, I've talked to both Jane, no, Jane's dad, I've talked to Phyllis, who's now in her 60s, at the time she was 17 when she talked from the bell tolls.
The stuff basically resided in her closet for 50 years.
She moved from Washington, D.C.
to North Carolina in 87, and her son came up from Florida to help him move, and they came across this stuff, and the son
you know, talks Mom out of some of it.
He then goes back to Florida and walks into the book dealer's shop.
The long process of two and a half months, three months, culminates in my getting some of the stuff, not the greatest stuff, but some of the stuff from the son.
And when I'm in Florida, from the son's house, I call Phyllis on the phone.
She's in North Carolina by now, or I don't know whether she moved from Washington, D.C.
to North Carolina.
by then, but in any case, every time I talked to her, I asked her if there was any more, you know, any Christmas cards or anything, and she never said there was, but when I got back to California with these six inscribed articles and a short story, I wrote her a long letter, you know, acknowledging what wonderful material it was, and again, asking if there was any more, and I didn't, this was, it would have been probably December of 87,
And I got a letter six months later in June.
Six months.
And she said, basically it was, he has to do that some more and I'll give it to my daughter.
And it turns out the daughter and the son don't speak.
They live in the same small boy town and they don't speak.
So I then phoned Phyllis and asked if it would be appropriate for me to contact the daughter directly.
Well, yes.
By implication, I think the daughter learned that the son got a lot of money for the stuff, and Mom had given the rest of the stuff to the daughter, so... A lot of money from you.
A lot of money from me to the son, and so the daughter learned that what she had was very valuable, and, you know, let's contact Mr. Neekin, so Phyllis wrote the letters to me.
Is this a figure you carry as well?
Well, I have right around six figures in everything I purchase in my family.
All right, thank you.
are a little less.
Do you have to borrow money for this?
Yes.
Refinance.
That's a way.
Well, it's a good investment.
Well, it's the most wonderful, it's certainly the most wonderful and significant anyway find, you know, that I know of in my life.
One place like this.
See, you log as Jehosh?
I'm log as another building.
It's a big lesson.
Is that right?
Well, yeah, because basically, you know, this to me is the passion.
I mean, what's going through your mind?
Why do you have to have this stuff?
Well, you know, I realized, especially when I, oh, let me tell you one other thing.
I'll answer your question.
So I'm talking to Phyllis on the phone, and I just sort of parenthetically say, by the way, where was that short story, time script, all these years?
And she said, well, it was stuck between the pages of the time script of Green Hills of Africa.
You know, my heart hit.
And I said, do you have the tidescript to Greenville's Act?
He said, yes.
I've given that to my daughter.
And so then the daughter had all this material.
And I phoned her.
And she said, why don't you come over, I haven't gone through it yet.
Why don't you come down and we'll go through it.
And I really didn't want to have that much
financial and emotional investment, unless I was going to be able to buy it.
So I said, you go through it, list what's there, and send me the list, and I'll make you an offer, or we'll talk about it after you know what it is.
So it took her about two or three months to do that, and a couple other phone calls.
And then eventually, I made an offer, and it was very, very low in her eyes.
And I think she had
basically arrived at a figure that would dramatically change her lifestyle and didn't have much other, you know, relation to reality.
But for eight months then, I was talking with a dealer who was talking to her, and she never did say that she'd sell it.
She started talking about, she apparently had a number of children, and then 12 years later had another child, and the youngest child was
an infant at the time.
How did she get the typescript of Nehru?
Her mom gives some to the son and the balance to the daughter.
And I got 25 letters from Martha Gellhorn, 9 letters from Ernest, typescript for Greenhouse of Africa.
Wonderful, wonderful letters.
All about his, and I'll show them to you, all about his creative process, writing Greenhouse of Africa, writing to Have and Have Not, and some other stuff too, which I'll show you in a few minutes.
Jane, you'll see from some of the letters, just to give you an idea.
They were real close friends, and you can tell that by reading the letters from Ernest.
Okay, this is all concerned with Green Hills of Africa.
Which this is, by the way.
Is this for sale, too, by the way?
yeah yeah okay but it says by ernest hemingway key west florida u.s first serial rights only yeah um that is an old paper i i'll choose not to touch right the the first is a little rough and the last couple are rough but otherwise it's it's a wonderful condition yeah it is and this is obviously the box that probably you know the box
I would say.
In Spanish, you probably bought it.
In Blanco, B-L-A-N-C-O.
Makina de Esco by typing paper.
Let me write that down.
Yeah.
Okay, we're back on here.
Before I purchased, I wanted to verify what it was.
So I wrote to Kennedy, who has another typescript of Green Hills of Africa.
Explain what Kennedy is.
JFK.
JFK Library in Boston, Massachusetts, who has the Hemingway
The conversation between Mary and Jackie Kennedy is how that happens.
That's not famous, but it's nice.
On January 4, 1935, Jane Armstrong had basically finished typing Green Hills of Africa in Fort Reynolds.
Here's a letter that she writes.
He apparently was vacationing in Arkansas.
And she didn't want to send a manuscript with Harrington, who was the captain of the boat that went between Havana and Key West, because she was afraid that he might not be there.
You want to read the letter?
Yeah, well, I just love this.
It's Habana, H-A-B-A-N-A dash, January 4th, numeral 4th, T-H, just before mail time.
Right.
Dear Ernest, you are far too charitable,
About my solitary talent.
About my solitary talent, Gash.
And besides, it's languished beneath a bushel.
Or have I got that next during the holidays, which snuck up like, snuck is best called, like fees in the night or something.
The thing is, I'm overwhelmed.
with remorse at visions of your... Maybe you can read it better.
Okay.
The thing is, I'm overwhelmed with remorse at visions of your face peering hopefully up at the bridge of the Cuba tomorrow, that's the name of the boat, when there isn't going to be any manuscript aboard.
But then maybe you aren't back from Arkansas yet anyway, and it might get lost if you didn't claim it in person.
I took you literally about it being a rough copy, and as I've galloped along, Rick has trailed me with a pencil picking up lapses.
in a few instances that's her husband richard a few instances i've left wide open spaces to fill in a word it will be largely done for the boat on wednesday the ninth and the remainder to go forward at earliest possible moment which maybe i can write a more coherent note the dos passos are here to go over to the isle of pines tonight and later on down in the british west indies and this morning rick
had a cordial note from Miss Kaldewaler, C-A-D-A-W-A-L-L-A-D-A-R, with the Tarplin book of Demox he'd long wanted.
Unless you hear otherwise by cable, then most of the manuscript, with copy and carbon, will be confided to Captain H next Wednesday morning.
Now, the manuscript and the two typescripts, one of them is in the...
The Kennedy Museum in Boston.
About approximately 260 pages.
The missing 80 pages from that draft is with the University of Delaware Library.
Now the only one with corrections in Hemingway's hand is the portion of the one at Boston.
I got Xerox copies of what the Kennedy had and what the University of Delaware had before I finalized this because
I wanted to make sure it was what it was.
And she uses two different typefaces, and they're precisely the same.
So there's this—this is nine-point type.
I just saw something penciled in derriere in green ink.
Yes.
She said that she left some blanks.
Blanks and so—that's not in Ernest's hand, though.
No, it's not in Ernest's hand.
I don't know whose hand that is.
And there are only two or three in the whole thing.
He made corrections on the other one.
But basically, this letter establishes that her intention was to mail the handwritten manuscript and the two type copies back to him.
Do you know what year this is going on?
Yes, this is 35.
Okay.
Because it doesn't get the year.
Right.
And let me show you these other letters.
Okay.
So then he gets this letter, and then he sends her this telegram.
Arrived yesterday meeting Harrington.
That's the captain of the voltage goes back and forth.
Meeting Harrington Saturday.
Gratefulest, Ernest.
This is January 10th, 1935.
Western Union Cable.
Right up.
Okay.
Now we've got this one.
Dear Ernest.
This is January 11th.
Havana.
She gets a telegram.
She's shipping the stuff.
Dear Ernest.
Here it is.
And however inadequate typing,
And you'll notice the typeface is the same as that used in... This is important.
Why do you keep pointing this out?
I know why.
Okay, this is nine-point type, and it's the typewriter she had at the U.S.
Embassy where she worked.
And also, there's elite type used in this.
And at the Kennedy, what they have, of course, was done... The pages where she would change to the elite type are the same.
And that's what I wanted to confirm, that this really was exactly what it was supposed to be.
There's no chance that any of this could be forgeries or anything.
No.
Have you had any chemical stuff done on the paper?
But, you know, looking at, I've seen what the Kennedy has, and, you know, it's just, they're both the same draft.
And the provenance is excellent.
Oh, yeah.
Right.
So here's this letter, which he actually sent it to him.
Here it is.
And however inadequate it typed in, when I could, I worked on my machine at the office,
And for the rest of it, use this old mill, which you know so well.
Now, I guess this is the one she had at home, the nine-point type.
Like hunting greater kudu with a popcorn.
It was a great experience watching it unfold, the vibrant Africa I knew it must be, the country you're homesick for, though you've never seen it.
Not glamorous, not romantic, but so much better than that.
That's excellent.
The engaging personalities moving in their own rhythms, standing out in their full stature,
stature and integrity of their own background, not thrown in as props to hold glory-reflecting mirrors.
You forgot remarks, Rick, at this point.
It wasn't Halliburton writing the story.
The introspective digressions, too, are well included, particularly that one magnificent passage of the Gulf Stream soliloquy, all developed with that deceptive simplicity so devilish to achieve which has confounded even your better imitators.
The things you changed your mind about are illuminating too.
It's grand to have seen it in the making.
Some of the construction and hyphenation left me in somewhat of a quandary because I haven't forgotten that crack you made about my having copied even your mistakes.
But who am I to say when they are?
If, as you suggested, you find your way clear to send the manuscript back, I'll be inexpressibly delighted to have it.
but I'm not interested in knowing who might be able to dispose of it, just how many libraries have a Hemingway holograph.
Best to you all from both of us.
All right.
These are Carvins, of course.
Yeah, she kept Carvins of her own, and then she... That was dated Havana, January 11th.
Right.
And then here's his response.
This is the letter.
February 5th, 1935, Box 406, Key West, and pencil in Hemingway's hand.
And then he typed the letter, Dear Dick and Jane.
I haven't written to thank Jane for the swell typing, for the swell typing job, because I've been waiting until I can send the, i.e., the holograph.
Apparently he's just learning this word.
Think of old Ham having written holographs all these years and not knowing it.
As soon as I definitely get it pared down and in Scribner's hands,
We'll send it over by Harrington.
It was a beautiful job of figuring out what the hell my holograph meant, and I appreciate it very much.
Max Perkins and Dos, that's John Dos Passos, of course, who have read it, like it very much.
No one had seen it at this time.
Jane and Perkins and Dos Passos, his own ones who read it by February 5th of 35.
Dos like it very much, have read it, like it very much, and I'm beginning to feel better about it.
I was so damn pleased that you both liked it, but was afraid maybe Jane liked it because she likes Africa, and that Vic liked it because he likes or liked to drink.
I have cut considerable garden manure and night soil out of it, but have left in the Gulf Stream as you requested.
Question without having to read the whole thing.
Yes, I'm not going to read it anymore.
Okay.
Any chance of getting a zero-art for this?
No, I don't want to do that.
Okay.
But basically that's what deals with Green Hills of Africa, that portion.
And, you know, she, in her letter, said, leave in the stuff about the Gulf Stream, so he quite magnanimously, and maybe incorrectly, but just as a compliment there, says, I left in the stuff about the Gulf Stream as you requested.
As you requested.
Right.
Yeah.
That's great.
How did he sign it?
Ernest.
And you're welcome to read it, you know, later.
Okay.
Regards to... Manuolo.
Yeah.
And then there's some pencil.
Right.
Later in the letter...
He asks Richard to, this is also significant because it's another literary thing, he asks Richard to get Carlos Guterres, who was the mate on the Pilar, to get some baits and tie some baits because he has to do this big snot of a book for Derrido Press.
So obviously that occurred, and Richard, who was a photojournalist, he wanted him to take pictures.
So here we have it.
That paragraph led to Richard Armstrong getting Carlos Gutierrez and trying to Bates, just as Ernest directs in that letter.
And I'll show you those very pictures that that paragraph was the instigation for.
Right here.
And this is Carlos Gutierrez, his mate on the phone.
Carlos is going to spell it.
It's Carlos G-U-T.
I-E, I-E, R-R-E-Z.
R-R-E-Z.
And he specifically tells him to have him, you know, tie the bait, the mackerel a certain way, and it's just fascinating, you know, that... So he's got 12 pictures of his bait.
I love that the letter has all of Hemingway's legendary idiosyncrasies with typing.
The raised letters, you know how it says letters are famous, but I'm going to put my pen down there.
Sure.
I saw a couple of raised letters.
It just looks like a Hemingway letter.
Right.
It's better now become very famous because he's even.
Oh, yeah.
Is this the cornerstone of the... Well, this, I've got nine other letters.
Okay, but the significance of that for you is what?
Oh, this whole thing.
Well, you know, the letters, the carbons from Jane and the ones,
They sort of legitimized her possessing the manuscript, because she says, I'm going to send you the manuscript and the two, you know, the carbon and the original.
So she sends them to him, presumably, and then he sends back to her the original manuscript, the handwritten manuscript, and this, okay?
And he makes his changes on the copy that he then sends to Max Perkins and Scribner's.
Later, in 1947,
Phyllis, the daughter, who was hard up at the time, sold the handwritten manuscript through Scribner's to the University of Virginia Library, and that's where it is now.
But this stuff all... Well, it validates everything.
Yeah, right, exactly.
It's documentation, shall we say.
Right, yeah.
It validates everything else.
Right.
It basically legitimizes the provenance.
Okay.
Okay, that's great.
Would you say that the Times claimed that you have the finest collection of Hemingway manuscript material in private hands, is that correct?
Well, I don't know of any other Hemingway novels, non-fiction novels, any typescripts in a private collection.
I don't know of any.
There may be some, but I don't know of any, and no collector I've talked to knows of any.
All of the Hemingway manuscripts, the University of Texas has some,
Virginia has some, the Kennedy has a number, but I don't know of any in private hands.
And the number of short stories in private hands are very, very few.
There are some, but look at that.
Did you read that?
I had the case made.
It's very beautiful.
Can you describe it for us?
Describe it for the... Yeah, the case is a slip case with a cover.
The story, the capital of the world, the story is about...
A guy who works in a restaurant, a waiter, who wants to be a bullfighter.
And so he picks up a chair and ties a sword to it.
And eventually, in trying to get this other guy who's working with him, he gets stabbed.
That's the plot of the story.
So in some kind of brass welding, soldering, someone has drawn a chair with a sword tied to it.
and then a facsimile awareness having a signature on the front of the box that I had made for.
Prior to the acquisition of this, we could say that you had an excellent collection of first editions.
Yeah, a wonderful collection of first editions, some letters, but nothing like this.
You were what could be regarded as a possessor of a really fine,
Hemingway collection.
Right.
I had all the first editions in Dust Jack.
But nothing that would attract a writer from Boston to come and see you, right?
That's right.
That's for sure.
But no, there's a point here.
So tell me about opportunity and now what happened?
I mean, now you're, did this occasion you're becoming a dealer in rare books?
No, I made the commitment to become a dealer before, but, you know, having had all of the time,
as a serious collector, you know, I know what this stuff is, and you haven't seen it yet.
You haven't seen it all yet, and I'll continue to show it to you, but, you know, just the wealth of material was just phenomenal.
And just let me briefly show you some more of this stuff.
You've seen the Cosmopolitan article.
This is just a first edition one of 300 things that had a nice box before.
This is the, it's hard to call it a short story,
But it's... Today is Friday.
It's A5A.
I love the story.
Yeah.
And this is the first edition of that.
This was one of the six magazine articles that I got.
Well, well, well, Ernest Hemingway.
Bullfighting, sport and industry.
Page 83 of Fortune magazine from March 1930.
This is the second issue of Fortune magazine.
This was a precursor to death in the afternoon, and it's never been reprinted.
I have permission from the Hemingway family, the lawyers, in writing, to put out a small press edition of this, and I will do that in the next year or so.
I would like an opportunity to buy one.
Sure.
Right.
Okay.
All right.
Yeah.
No, because we have a small Hemingway family.
Right.
Well, this will be an A item.
Yeah.
You're going to sell them?
Right.
I want to buy one.
Sure.
You bet.
All right.
but very few things have not been republished you know but i was aware this one wasn't and i was you know just sort of parenthetically i'll tell you a quick story i was retained a movie producer read the l.a times article on this acquisition and he called me and said he'd like to to do a movie of green hills of africa and i said well of course you know i do have a type script but the rights for movie don't go with that well
Yeah, but then I started talking.
But I am a lawyer, and I do know the lawyer for the Hemingway family.
Whose name is?
His name is Bobrinsky, B-O-B-R-I-N-S-K-Y, in Chicago.
And I talked to him before, just once before.
So the producer retained me to attempt to acquire the rights to make a motion picture production of Greenhouse of Africa.
So that was one offshoot.
That didn't work out, but it was fun doing it.
And that was because of the publicity for this stuff.
This came again with that collection.
This is one of the first six things I got from this song.
This, and this, and then this.
And this later I got from the daughter.
And these letters, which are really the most magnificent.
This is awfully nice.
I mean, I'll never find anything like this again.
That's a cartoon or a dealer.
You know, this is a launch in a lifetime.
Yeah, this is really a nice type of good fortune.
So this is for you.
Oh, yeah.
And we're going to want you to describe it first.
Sure.
Right on.
Here's Cody, Wyoming.
And this is George Gellhorn, has the honor of announcing the daughter of Emeridge Marfitt and Mr. Henry Harris Hemingway.
That's very nice.
21st of November.
1940.
Cheyenne, Wyoming.
And that's in Hemingway's hand to Richard Armstrong, Ambos Mundos Hotel.
Ambos, A-N-B-O-S, Mundos, M-O-N-D-O-S Hotel.
Peaceful, O-B-I-S-P-O-25, telephone, M-dash-9-8-1-1, pardon me, Habana, H-A-B-A-N-A.
The building looks like the Flatiron Building in New York, doesn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
I can say there are nine letters from Werners, 25 letters from Martha Gellhorn, and some other wonderful letters.
This is the most magnificent letter from Gingrich you could ever want.
Well, maybe you could read it.
Okay.
Let's explain to my type of letter.
Arnold Gingrich was the man who was the publisher and editor of Esquire magazine.
And this letter is approximately 1935 or 1936.
It's not dated.
It can be dated from some of the stuff inside of it.
Internally, but it's not dated.
Exactly.
Dear E.H.,
Notice in the November issue of Esquire how SELS, S-E-L-D-E-S, has kept alive the one about the dirty words.
Ernest did an article in defense of dirty words or something like that.
Thought you might miss seeing it since you have nothing in that issue yourself.
Are you going to need all the time I gave you, i.e.
up to the 28th or 29th, to get your December letter in?
I would prefer having copy a few days earlier if I could on account of illustrations, etc.,
unless, of course, you are winding up in your book and can use the extra days to advantage.
How wouldn't it be to write me about Stein and Toklas?
How would it be to write me about Stein and Toklas?
They will be here in November, and probably the newspapers will be spilling a lot of crap in goofy adulation, as indeed they've already begun to do,
as maybe it would be nice to have a 2,000-word fart on that subject.
And Ernest hated Gretchen Stein.
Right.
By then he did.
The controversial stuff seems to be a pure talent of yours.
I can't read that word.
A prize, it looks like.
Oh, a prize.
That's it.
A prize talent of yours.
In our 12 issues to date, that's how you can date the letter, we have...
Never seen anything half as stimulating as the one on dirty words.
Spent a morning with Scott Fitzgerald in Baltimore last week.
What a nice weather.
Yeah.
Or rather, week before last.
Somehow, guessing my interest in you and your stuff, for I had never told him of it, he spent most of the time talking about the days when you and he were in Paris at the same time.
It was a very enjoyable session.
Knopf paid the dough.
Right.
That was due in delivery of my manuscript very promptly.
He has scheduled publication for February 11th, which is my second kid's first birthday.
Still haven't had a chance to go fishing.
Having spent all my time on catching up on work, I let slide in August and September.
Magazine continues to increase in circulation and in advertising, although the latter is coming very slowly.
but at least it's coming in.
However, the whole tone of the publicity we receive every month has changed.
Critical opinion has swung clear around, and we are being wildly booed and panned.
Some of the guys who said the best things about the magazine a few months back are now making the snottiest cracks, notably Harry Hanson,
H-A-N-S-O-N, right?
Maybe S-E-N.
And O-O McIntyre.
As long as they help on discussing the magazine, as long as they keep on discussing the magazine at all, this doesn't bother me.
I'll be pretty bothered if they suddenly shut up and say nothing about it anymore.
You never tell me anything about your book.
Is it finished, and when will it be out?
And is it going to be serialized?
That's the point of the letter, isn't it?
You're right.
And is it going to be serialized, or do I have it, or do I have to wait to see a copy of the book itself?
Don't you get extra proofs?
And if you do, could I borrow a secular over a weekend sometime, or even overnight?
and I'd send it right back the next day.
Not hearing from you for some while, I take it that the fish have been running or that the book has been finishing or both.
Hope so.
Cordially, Arnold Gingrich.
This is the very beginning of Esquire magazine.
Right.
And there's a very famous story about how Gingrich got Hemingway to write for it.
Hemingway basically said, what's the most you pay anyone else?
and double that, and I'll write for you.
And he did.
And here's a wonderful letter from Katie Dos Passos.
You don't have to read it.
Okay.
Basically, the letter's to Jane, and this is from Hemingway.
This is from Katie Dos Passos to Jane Armstrong.
Katie's in Key West, and Jane is in Cuba.
She says, Pauline and I are going to New York, or I'm going to New York, and we need some hair done.
Pauline wants blonde and mine is platinum.
There's this place in Cuba you can get it.
Go get it because we'd hate to arrive in New York and have our platinum turned into black roots immediately.
And then Hemingway and Pauline send their love and that sort of stuff.
Here's a letter from Pauline to Ernest.
Ernest had hurt his thumb and was infected.
It's the only thing I have from Pauline.
He's very worried about your finger, keep me informed, love to doses in your poly.
So Hemingway's over in Cuba, fishing, or whatever he did over there.
D-O-S-E-S is for the Dos Passos.
D-O-S-P-A-S is for my type, those two words.
And these are the other nine Hemingway letters.
Some of them really don't have that much interest, but some of them are... Four of them he wrote while he was writing, For Whom the Bell's Ones.
Just to interrupt, this letter from Gingrich to Ernest, the novel, is that, which novel was that?
I believe that would be To Have and Have Not.
Okay.
And I'm not sure, I'd have to find out when Eschire first started, but I, because Greenhouse of Africa was published in 35, and To Have and Have Not was published in 37.
That's something you've got to check out.
Yeah.
Make your letters stronger.
Right on.
This, I'm showing you now, accompanied the first eight chapters of For Whom the Bell Tolls when he delivered it to his typist, this letter.
It's never been folded.
You're welcome to read it if you want.
That's okay.
Okay.
And, like I said, four of the letters were about For Whom the Bell Tolls.
Did you put them in these plastic, or were they...?
No, Lynn Armstrong did, The Daughter of Phyllis.
Well, that was good.
Right.
I had the short story deacidified.
It was like 75 bucks a page.
And I haven't done that to these yet, and it needs to be done.
Because, you know, 75 bucks a page?
Yeah.
I may have made too much.
Where was that from?
A man who works for the museum in San Francisco and the Crocker Museum here, and, you know, does that kind of thing.
I can tell you it's too much.
Yeah, I think it is too.
Jack Craig did our whole thing for less than that.
I'm going to put you in touch with somebody.
Great, thank you.
The Antiquarian Society has their own people that do it.
If you just want to save three, four thousand dollars, you might.
Yeah.
It'd be worth it to hand carry.
This is perhaps the finest letter in the bunch.
The reason for this is
is it gives a plan for to have and have not that no one had ever heard about before.
So let me just read part of it.
And give me the date, please.
Okay, Key West, July 25, 1936.
Which is in pencil.
In pencil.
And then the letter is tied.
The letter is tied.
Yeah.
With a pencil written in postcard.
Or the last signed in.
Whatever.
Yeah.
Dear Dick.
Dear Dick, thanks very much for the pics, kid.
That one of Pauline as the masked marvel will be good to illustrate how to dress for deep-sea fishing for Vogue.
How have you been keeping?
I was really sorry we weren't here when Jane went through.
Richard, I have something I need for this damned book I'm working on that don't know whether you can get or not.
What I want is contemporary newspaper eyewitness accounts that I can rewrite or steal from what facts I want of these events.
The Park Massacre, sacking of Machado Palace, and hunting of paristas, the National Fight, Ataris, the
bc abc the abc massacre funeral of mella the last authentico united front general strike that failed and that the army put down and an account of the ciglius body finding also killing of guterres and any hoven cuba stuff you have could you get me those i suppose some of those times most probably there were no papers in havana could you get them from files of u.s papers in that event
I know this is a hell of a job, but if you can get them for me, we'll give you any amount of manuscripts, first editions, items, etc.
This kind of shows that they had this sort of understanding.
Exactly.
If there are contemporary Cuban accounts, send as many as you can.
Run into each.
I'd like to have them as soon as you can get sent to me at LT Ranch.
L-T, capital Ranch.
cook city montana don't with any young cook don't wait to get everything send everything you get as anything thank you anything you get as as you get it and check it all off the list check it off the list no all okay i'm sorry that's okay i've postponed the book of stories because i want to use the one trip across tradesman's return and three others that have to do with the same people plus the one i was telling you about
about cuba and need this stuff for background they all link up and i want to have the cuban stuff in between sort of like the chapters in between the stories in in our time what i need is this stuff i'm writing you for as source material to make up out of can you tell or write me the original of the story you told me about the shooting of the father and sons i want to contract
contrast the events in key west and havana and carry a thing through both of them this is maybe too much a hell of a job and if so tell me so but if you can do it we'll try to make payment in items write me to the ranch will you great letter we are handing out we are heading out there tomorrow with the manuscript and going to stay until it's as near finished as can get saving the boat leaving the boat up the miami river everybody is fine
We all send you and Jane our very best.
Good luck.
And then in pencil.
And thank you a... I can't remember.
A eternally amount or something.
Something like that.
Amount, which you can... Whenever you can get the stuff ready, Ernest.
Right, I can't forget it.
Everlasting, something like that.
Right.
Wow.
Dick again is who?
Richard Armstrong was head of the International News Bureau in Havana, Cuba.
Let me show you a picture of him.
He's the dear dick in this letter.
Right.
He was a drinking buddy of Havana, Cuba.
I think they probably had the first friendship, and then Jane came into it.
Do we have any way of knowing how much Armstrong complied with the request?
Yes.
That's, I'll tell you that next.
Oh, that's great.
Isn't that wonderful?
Now this, this is, that's Richard Armstrong.
Well, he posed for this ad.
He posed for this ad.
Senior Richard Armstrong.
Did that him?
Chief of International News Service.
Cuban drill.
He smokes white owl cigars, right?
Right, exactly.
That's an ad for white owl cigars with a portly looking guy.
Sidney Street Street kind of a guy.
Right.
In a white suit.
Pucket full of cigars.
Those are all Richards.
So they probably met up at a bar or something, huh?
Yeah.
He's a photojournalist.
And Hemingway's a journalist?
You bet.
That's love to hang out with him.
Networking, as they call it.
Right.
Where'd you get that ephemeral stuff?
The trip I went down to buy the stuff from the daughter.
I then went back, I came back to Tampa, or St.
Petersburg, but the next day I drove down again a hundred miles and visited the sun a second time.
and basically is there anything more you have about your family and he came up with some wonderful stuff like for instance this that's that is wonderful oh it is and um yeah basically worthless to anybody else right that's what makes it nice but on that third trip i forgot to show you this i showed you the description yeah that uh talks about the side of the storm what the cosmopolitan piece right but i forgot to show you this photograph this is richard and jane jane armstrong
on the porch and and you can see the havana harbor in the background and that's the site of this very story this upper porch and the inscription is to phyllis here's the very best sort oh here's to the very best sort of new year's sweet sweetheart from daddy and mother 1-1-32 when i got this on the third trip and i recognized that this would be wonderful to have for this story because this is the site of the story you know this is the cosmopolitan march
Issue of March, once again?
1939.
Yeah.
Okay.
So how many trips did you make to Florida?
Just two.
Uh-huh.
How many would you have made?
I think it's possible.
I'd still be going back if I thought there was more.
Let's talk a little bit about this passion that overtook you now.
We've looked at specifics.
Let's talk about it.
What's going through your mind here as this thing happened?
This thing was developing.
Yeah, there was this eight-month period when I knew the stuff was there and we were so far apart in negotiating.
Briefly, I'll go through what occurred there.
Finally, the book dealer suggested that the typescript was worth more
than I thought it was, because it doesn't have any Tesla corrections in Hemingway's hand.
And so I made a final offer, which was more than I'd made before, and he conveyed that to her.
She still didn't say that she would even sell this stuff, because she'd been talking about maybe giving it to her young son.
So I made her appointment.
I said, well, time is no longer on my side.
It's been eight months, and I keep on going up and haven't heard anything from her, basically.
And I was talking to the book dealer now, not talking to her directly.
So we made an appointment to see her in her town, and I flew back, and my friend, the book dealer, told me after I got off the plane that there'd been a possible glitch, that he'd received a phone call from another book dealer in Florida, closer to where she lived, saying he had some letters from Hemingway
and maybe a possibility of a typescript of Green Hill of America.
So, here I am back there now, you know, pretty anxious.
And so my friend, the book dealer, told the other book dealer, yeah, we'd be interested, you know, how much.
Did this press attention that you got, did that surprise you?
Not really, but, you know, it's not something I sought.
What happened is Lynn had called the press.
Who's Lynn?
Lynn.
The Florida guy.
The Florida woman.
Florida woman.
The daughter, where I got the second group of stuff from.
And so when we got to this small Florida town, not knowing what to expect, knowing that she had contacted another book dealer.
And in that eight months we're talking to her, for all I know, she could have started contacting people in New York, which, of course, I didn't want.
You know, or option houses.
Oh, sure.
And it's a whole other ballgame.
You bet.
More than likely.
Big bucks.
Yeah, well, I pay big bucks for it.
But, you know, query whether or not she could have gotten more, and she probably could have.
But nationally, I didn't want that to happen.
I didn't want any competition.
But, you know, for this eight-month period, she could have contacted anyone she wanted.
In any case, we get down there.
We meet at the conference room of her bank.
She's not there.
The people at the Met told me, she's over-xeroxing the stuff.
And that was the first good sign.
If she's xeroxing the stuff, she's going to sell it to me.
So then she got there.
And she was really courteous, a really nice woman.
And the press was there.
They took some pictures of her holding up some of the stuff.
And wanted to interview me.
I said, your feeling must be, oh, please.
Exactly.
You got it.
Basically, it was, get out.
Let's do this deal.
If I get the stuff, I'd be happy to talk to you.
Right now, you're a distraction.
Oh, a major distraction.
And so they took the pictures and then left.
No, this was local press, Florida press?
This is local press.
Have you got any copies of these stories, by the way, Seth?
I've got some stuff over there, some public stuff that I'll give you.
Good.
So, go ahead.
Excuse me.
Anyway, so then Lynn and I and the book dealer sat down in the room, and I made another offer, which was more than any figure that had ever been mentioned before.
And she accepted it.
So we're all happy.
Not until the check is signed in the papers.
Did you have any kind of contract?
Well, yeah, we made a very brief contract, basically.
You know, what the stuff was, and then I was buying it, and we also signed the book dealer, Lynn, and myself.
And how did you get to be, own the rights to that unpublished, that piece over there that you showed me?
That unpublished, the Fortune magazine piece?
I talked to the book, I talked to the Hemingway lawyer once before.
And then the movie producer, the guy who produced the Presidio with Sean Connery, and earlier he was, I think, the producer or co-producer of Breathless with Richard Gare a few years earlier.
But, you know, a serious producer in Hollywood.
So I'm talking to Bob Brinsky about this, one of our conversations, and I mentioned that I'm aware of some unpublished Hemingway items, and I intend to be a small press publisher.
So I start talking about this, and ask him directly, and then write him a letter, and he writes me a letterbox.
That's pretty nice.
You don't have to pay him anything?
Yeah, you wanted me to make a donation to the Hemingway Foundation.
That's really very decent.
Oh, it certainly is, yeah.
That's great.
That's a good story.
One thing we haven't really addressed is why
I noticed you've got some Walker Percy books up there.
You have a William Styron, Mario Puzo, but these are books for stock, right?
Yeah.
These are books that you sell, Ken Kesey, London.
Whatever.
But you really only collect Hemingway.
Yeah.
Well, Larry McMurtry, I'm pretty interested in.
And I like mystery writers, too.
You collect?
Well, I wouldn't say collect really now.
I mean, I have most of the stuff, but mostly it's really part of an inventory.
Tell me why the passion for Hemingway.
I guess I can sort of obliquely, I've read the first chapter, first two chapters to Afraid of World Arms a couple hundred times, and it's like music to me.
I mean, it's just beautiful.
It's like when you listen to some great music and you have a real emotional response to it.
You know, some of Hemingway, I react that way too.
And then...
I don't know all the emotions that go into being a collector, but once you start, I think it's the hunt, really.
Possessing the stuff isn't that great, but it's the fun of the hunt.
That's why I decided to go into the business and virtually put all of the stuff for sale, because the hunt was fun, but once you have everything, then it's not that fun anymore, because so seldom do you find something you don't have.
I guess, obviously, the culmination to my collecting was finding this one magnificent person.
How old are you?
49.
But you would say that that's a young man, is the reason I ask.
You could collect for 25 more years, but do you think that you'll find an experience as great as this?
No, I don't think so.
I can't imagine.
I can't imagine there being, there existing, a closet full of
of original Hemingway material, and they're made.
Well, they're at the Hemingway, but that's my point.
You just collect Hemingway.
You might find the Larry McMurtry thing someplace, but that doesn't, this is the kick.
Yeah, right.
And now I sense it's all for sale, technically.
Is that correct?
Sure.
The price is right?
Well, right, but I haven't, you know, I've had it for two, two and a half years.
I haven't carefully cataloged it and described it and advertised it and, you know, I haven't really tried to sell it.
I mean, it's,
eminently saleable material let's say a guy like maury neville walks in yeah and says right um here's the check i've signed it you and he has the means to do something like yes he does and he's a very careful collector he's been a book dealer for a lot of years so he tends to want to buy things wholesale so the truth is i probably wouldn't sell it to maury but there's some retail customers out there who would be a better market and if i wanted to you know once i
get into selling it, then it's something that I'll make a description of and give descriptions to four or five people who have wonderful collections and the means to buy it.
So you expect at some point, realistically, to sell it.
Yeah.
You're going to enjoy it.
Right.
In the meantime, I'm not terribly anxious to do that.
That's a nice story.
It's a good story for us.
And it's a good story because it does illustrate that for you, the excitement was really in the hunt.
The anxiety that JFK could be breathing down your neck, for instance.
Or Maury Neville could be...